             PRESTO
             ------

http://www.cv.nrao.edu/~sransom/presto/

PRESTO is a large suite of pulsar search and analysis software
developed by Scott Ransom mostly from scratch (and released under the
GPL).  It was primarily designed to efficiently search for binary
millisecond pulsars from long observations of globular clusters
(although it has since been used in several surveys with short
integrations and to process a lot of X-ray data as well).  It is
written primarily in ANSI C, with many of the recent routines in
Python.  According to Steve Eikenberry, PRESTO stands for: PulsaR
Exploration and Search TOolkit!

Written with portability, ease-of-use, and memory efficiency in mind,
it can currently handle raw data from the following pulsar machines or
formats:

    * PSRFITS search-format data (as from GUPPI at the GBT)
    * SPIGOT at the GBT
    * Most Wideband Arecibo Pulsar Processor (WAPP) at Arecibo
    * The Parkes and Jodrell Bank 1-bit filterbank formats
    * Berkeley-Caltech Pulsar Machine (BCPM) at the GBT (may it RIP...)
    * 8-bit filterbank format from SIGPROC (other formats will 
      be added if required)
    * A time series composed of single precision (i.e. 4-byte) 
      floating point data
    * Photon arrival times (or events) in ASCII or double-precision 
      binary formats

The software is composed of numerous routines designed to handle three
main areas of pulsar analysis:

   1. Data Preparation: Interference detection and removal, 
      de-dispersion, barycentering (via TEMPO).
   2. Searching: Fourier-domain acceleration, single-pulse, and 
      phase-modulation (or sideband) searches.
   3. Folding: Candidate optimization and Time-of-Arrival (TOA) generation.

Many additional utilities are provided for various tasks that are
often required when working with pulsar data such as time conversions,
Fourier transforms, time series and FFT exploration, byte-swapping,
etc.

The Fourier-Domain acceleration search technique that PRESTO uses in
the routine accelsearch is described in Ransom, Eikenberry, and
Middleditch (2002), and the phase-modulation search technique used by
search_bin is described in Ransom, Cordes, and Eikenberry (2003).
Some other basic information about PRESTO can be found in my thesis.
I will eventually get around to finishing the documentation for
PRESTO, but until then you should know that each routine returns its
basic usage when you call it with no arguments.  I am also willing to
provide limited support via email or telephone (434-296-0320).

To date, PRESTO has discovered well over a hundred pulsars, including
more than 70 recycled pulsars, over 50 of which are in binaries!

Getting it: The PRESTO source code is released under the GPL and can
be browsed or gotten from here in many different ways (including
zipped or tar'd or via git).  If you plan to tweak the code, I highly
suggest that you use git and clone the directory (or fork it using an
account on github).  If you plan on doing any significant development,
please let me know and I'll either add you as a developer, or we can
push/pull changes via git/github.  Code contributions are most
welcome!

Please let me know if you decide to use PRESTO for any "real"
searches.  And if you find anything with it, it would be great if you
would cite either my thesis or whichever of the two papers listed
above is appropriate.  Thanks!

Acknowledgements: Big thanks go to Steve Eikenberry for his help
developing the algorithms, Dunc Lorimer for the basic code which is
used to process BCPM and WAPP data, David Kaplan for lots of help with
the GBT SPIGOT code, Jason Hessels for many contributions to the
Python routines (and along with Maggie Livingstone for the rednoise
reduction routine), and Paul Ray, Ingrid Stairs, Fernando Camilo, Cees
Bassa, Patrick Lazarus and Paulo Freire for many comments and
suggestions (and even some patches!).

Scott Ransom <sransom@nrao.edu>
